## Repository containing scripts and materials related to the [manuscript](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msae128) titled: Genome-Wide Allele Frequency Changes Reveal That Dynamic Metapopulations Evolve Differently  


### Abstract

Two important characteristics of metapopulations are extinction–(re)colonization dynamics and gene flow between subpopulations. These processes can cause strong shifts in genome-wide allele frequencies that are generally not observed in “classical” (large, stable, and panmictic) populations. Subpopulations founded by one or a few individuals, the so-called propagule model, are initially expected to show intermediate allele frequencies at polymorphic sites until natural selection and genetic drift drive allele frequencies toward a mutation–selection–drift equilibrium characterized by a negative exponential-like distribution of the site frequency spectrum. We followed changes in site frequency spectrum distribution in a natural metapopulation of the cyclically parthenogenetic pond-dwelling microcrustacean _Daphnia magna_ using biannual pool-seq samples collected over a 5-yr period from 118 ponds occupied by subpopulations of known age. As expected under the propagule model, site frequency spectra in newly founded subpopulations trended toward intermediate allele frequencies and shifted toward right-skewed distributions as the populations aged. Immigration and subsequent hybrid vigor altered this dynamic. We show that the analysis of site frequency spectrum dynamics is a powerful approach to understand evolution in metapopulations. It allowed us to disentangle evolutionary processes occurring in a natural metapopulation, where many subpopulations evolve in parallel. Thereby, stochastic processes like founder and immigration events lead to a pattern of subpopulation divergence, while genetic drift leads to converging site frequency spectrum distributions in the persisting subpopulations. The observed processes are well explained by the propagule model and highlight that metapopulations evolve differently from classical populations.
